situation 1:
If your answer is yes to any one of the above questions, then just calm down and do not think of quitting yet because of this reason. You already have a job and your were thinking a way of resigning from this current role, even then do not take this incident as a base for your resignation.

In a work environment such situations happen almost on daily basis with some or other person. The trick is to handle these situations. I will give you live example. I have been working on a project which is somehow out of my capability and knowledge. I am not from a technical field and yet I am working on a project with a vendor who is a shit piece but yet I have to work with him. My boss does not have clear idea as to what is happening but when management gets involved everyone is running to save their jobs and I am in front to take the bullet.

Now in a private job scenario you very clearly know how everyone wants to play safe to keep their jobs secure. Even I have tried my best but as luck would have it I am handling such projects which I do not know even have a future or not. So obviously I am being yelled at by my boss, by people who do not want to work on it and today was the same. I just got up from my workplace, took my phone, and roamed around to cool off. Did it help? In some sort it did. Although my problem is still stuck in my head but it stopped me from reacting in a way that would have costed my job.

My point is until unless you feel that your self esteem has been hurt and the damage is irreparable, do not quit. Colleagues important for getting work done but not on the cost of your job. It will be a victory for him/her and do not give them that joy. Trust me it will get back to him/her in some weird way.

Till then relax, do your work and have a nice cup of tea/coffee.

situation 2 :

In most cases I would say yes. But if helping your co worker means that you are unable to complete your tasks, then you need to be honest with them and let them know that you cannot help them right now. Also, if you do help them, you need to make sure you do not make a habit of it or at least inform your supervisor.